The mechanism of pattern recognition in the brain is
little known, and it seems to be almost impossible to
reveal it only by conventional physiological experiments. So, we take a slightly different approach to this
problem. If we could make a neural network model
which has the same capability for pattern recognition
as a human being, it would give us a powerful clue to
the understanding of the neural mechanism in the
brain. In this paper, we discuss how to synthesize a
neural network model in order to endow it an ability of
pattern recognition like a human being.
Several models were proposed with this intention
(Rosenblatt, 1962; Kabrisky, 1966; Giebel, 1971;
Fukushima, 1975). The response of most of these
models, however, was severely affected by the shift in
position and/or by the distortion in shape of the input
patterns. Hence, their ability for pattern recognition
was not so high.
In this paper, we propose an improved neural
network model. The structure of this network has been
suggested by that of the visual nervous system of the
vertebrate. This network is self-organized by "learning
without a teacher", and acquires an ability to recognize
stimulus patterns based on the geometrical similarity
(Gestalt) of their shapes without affected by their
position nor by small distortion of their shapes.
This network is given a nickname "neocognitron"l,
because it is a further extention of the "cognitron",
which also is a self-organizing multilayered neural
network model proposed by the author before
(Fukushima, 1975). Incidentally, the conventional
cognitron also had an ability to recognize patterns, but
its response was dependent upon the position of the
stimulus patterns. That is, the same patterns which
were presented at different positions were taken as
different patterns by the conventional cognitron. In the
neocognitron proposed here, however, the response of
the network is little affected by the position of the
stimulus patterns.
1 Preliminary report of the neocognitron already appeared elsewhere (Fukushima, 1979a, b)
0340-1200/80/0036/0193/$02.00 
194
The neocognitron has a multilayered structure, too.
It also has an ability of unsupervised learning: We do
not need any "teacher" during the process of selforganization, and it is only needed to present a set of
stimulus patterns repeatedly to the input layer of the
network. After completion of self-organization, the
network acquires a structure similar to the hierarchy
model of the visual nervous system proposed by Hubel
and Wiesel (1962, 1965).
According to the hierarchy model by Hubel and
Wiesel, the neural network in the visual cortex has a
hierarchy structure : LGB (lateral geniculate
body)--*simple cells-.complex cells~lower order hypercomplex cells--*higher order hypercomplex cells. It
is also suggested that the neural network between
lower order hypercomplex cells and higher order hypercomplex cells has a structure similar to the network
between simple cells and complex cells. In this hierarchy, a cell in a higher stage generally has a tendency
to respond selectively to a more complicated feature of
the stimulus pattern, and, at the same time, has a larger
receptive field, and is more insensitive to the shift in
position of the stimulus pattern.
It is true that the hierarchy model by Hubel and
Wiesel does not hold in its original form. In fact, there
are several experimental data contradictory to the
hierarchy model, such as monosynaptic connections
from LGB to complex cells. This would not, however,
completely deny the hierarchy model, if we consider
that the hierarchy model represents only the main
stream of information flow in the visual system. Hence,
a structure similar to the hierarchy model is introduced
in our model.
Hubel and Wiesel do not tell what kind of cells
exist in the stages higher than hypercomplex cells.
Some cells in the inferotemporal cortex (i.e. one of the
association areas) of the monkey, however, are reported to respond selectively to more specific and more
complicated features than hypercomplex cells (for example, triangles, squares, silhouettes of a monkey's
hand, etc.), and their responses are scarcely affected by
the position or the size of the stimuli (Gross et al.,
1972; Sato et al., 1978). These cells might correspond
to so-called "grandmother cells".
Suggested by these physiological data, we extend
the hierarchy model of Hubel and Wiesel, and hypothesize the existance of a similar hierarchy structure
even in the stages higher than hypercomplex cells. In
the extended hierarchy model, the cells in the highest
stage are supposed to respond only to specific stimulus
patterns without affected by the position or the size of
the stimuli.
The neocognitron proposed here has such an extended hierarchy structure. After completion of selforganization, the response of the cells of the deepest
layer of our network is dependent only upon the shape
of the stimulus pattern, and is not affected by the
position where the pattern is presented. That is, the
network has an ability of position-invariant patternrecognition.
In the field of engineering, many methods for
pattern recognition have ever been proposed, and
several kinds of optical character readers have already
been developed. Although such machines are superior
to the human being in reading speed, they are far
inferior in the ability of correct recognition. Most of
the recognition method used for the optical character
readers are sensitive to the position of the input
pattern, and it is necessary to normalize the position of
the input pattern beforehand. It is very difficult to
normalize the position, however, if the input pattern is
accompanied with some noise or geometrical distortion. So, it has long been desired to find out an
algorithm of pattern recognition which can cope with
the shift in position of the input pattern. The algorithm
proposed in this paper will give a drastic solution also
to this problem.